0
Majjhima Nikaya 21

1
The Parable of the Saw

2
(Kakacùpama sutta)

3
Thus I heard.

4
At one time, the Blessed One was residing in Savatthi, at Jetavana, the garden of Anathapindika.

5
At that time, the Venerable Moliya Phagguna lived in excessive association with the bhikkhunis.

The Venerable Moliya Phagguna lived in association with the bhikkhunis as follows:

If any bhikkhu spoke ill of those bhikkhunis in the presence of the Venerable Moliya Phagguna, the Venerable Moliya Phagguna would immediately become angry and displeased, and immediately question him;

if any bhikkhu spoke ill of the Venerable Moliya Phagguna in the presence of those bhikkhunis, the bhikkhunis would immediately become angry and displeased, and immediately question him. 


6

The Venerable Moliya Phagguna lived in such a way with the bhikkhunis.

Another bhikkhu came to where the Buddha was. After arriving, he paid homage to the Buddha and sat down to one side.

After sitting down to one side, the bhikkhu said to the Buddha:

7
-- Venerable Lord, the Venerable Moliya Phagguna lived in excessively close contact with the bhikkhunis.

Venerable Lord, the Venerable Moliya Phagguna lived in such a way with the bhikkhunis:

If any bhikkhu spoke ill of those bhikkhunis in the presence of the Venerable Moliya Phagguna, the Venerable Moliya Phagguna would immediately become angry, displeased, and question him;

if any bhikkhu spoke ill of the Venerable Moliya Phagguna in the presence of those bhikkhunis, those bhikkhunis would immediately become angry, displeased, and question him.

"Venerable Lord, the Venerable Moliya Phagguna lives in excessive association with the bhikkhunis in this way."

8
The Buddha called another bhikkhu and said:

9
"Bhikkhu, go, in my name, and call the bhikkhu Moliya Phagguna:

"Venerable Phagguna, the Master is calling you."

10
"Yes, Venerable Lord!"

11
The bhikkhu obeyed the Buddha and went to where the Venerable Moliya Phagguna was. When he arrived, he said to the Venerable Moliya Phagguna:

12
"Venerable Moliya Phagguna, the Master is calling you."

13
"Yes, Venerable."

14
The bhikkhu Moliya Phagguna obeyed the bhikkhu and went to where the Buddha was. When he arrived, he paid homage to the Buddha and sat down to one side.

The Buddha said to Venerable Moliya Phagguna, who was seated to one side:

15
-- Phagguna, is it true that it is said that you associate excessively with the nuns?

It is said that you associate with the nuns in this way:

"If any monk speaks ill of those nuns in your presence, you immediately become angry, displeased, and question him;

if any monk speaks ill of you in the presence of those nuns, those nuns immediately become angry, displeased, and question him."

Phagguna, is it true that you associate with the nuns in this way?

16
-- Yes, Lord.

17
-- Phagguna, are you a good man who, out of faith, has renounced his family and lives without a family?

18

-- Yes, Venerable Lord.

19
-- Phagguna, it is unworthy of you, a good man, to have renounced your family and become a householder out of faith, to associate excessively with nuns in this way.

Therefore, Phagguna, if anyone speaks ill of those nuns before you, Phagguna, you must abandon worldly desires and worldly thoughts.

Phagguna, you must learn as follows:

"May my mind not be defiled!

May I not speak evil words!

May I live with compassion, with a loving-kind heart, without harboring anger!" Phagguna, you must learn in this way.

20
Therefore, Phagguna, if someone in your presence strikes those bhikkhunis with their hands, throws earth at them, beats them with sticks, or strikes them with swords, Phagguna, you must abandon those desires...

and not harbor resentment.

Phagguna, you must learn to do so.

Therefore, Phagguna, if someone in your presence speaks ill of someone, Phagguna, you must abandon those desires...

and not harbor resentment.

Phagguna, you must learn to do so.

Therefore, Phagguna, if someone in your presence strikes them with their hands, throws earth at them, beats them with sticks, or strikes them with swords, Phagguna, you must abandon those desires related to worldly things, those thoughts related to worldly things.

"Now, Phagguna, you must learn as follows:

"May my mind not be defiled!

May I not speak evil words!

May I live with compassion, with a loving-kind heart, without harboring anger!" Thus, Phagguna, you must learn.

21
Then the Blessed One said to the monks:

22
-- "Now, monks, there was a time when my monks were very pure and joyful.

Now, monks, I tell you, monks, I practiced the practice of sitting still and eating.

Monks, by practicing the practice of sitting still and eating, I felt free from sickness and pain, light, healthy, and refreshed.

Monks, you should practice the practice of sitting still and eating.

Monks, by practicing the practice of sitting still and eating, you will feel free from sickness and pain, light, healthy, and refreshed.

Monks, I do not need to teach them anything;

monks, I only need to awaken mindfulness in them."

Bhikkhus, it is as if on level ground, at a crossroads, there is a chariot parked, harnessed to fine horses, with a whip ready.

A skilled charioteer, who controls the horses well, climbs into the chariot, grasping the reins with his left hand and the whip with his right, and can drive the chariot back and forth, wherever and however he wishes.

Similarly, Bhikkhus, I do not need to teach them anything;

Bhikkhus, I only need to awaken their mindfulness.

23
Therefore, Bhikkhus, abandon unwholesome actions and strive for wholesome actions; in this way, you will achieve maturity, prosperity, and strength in this Dharma and Vinaya.

Bhikkhus, just as near a small village or town there is a large tala forest, a forest covered with ylang-ylang vines.

A person comes to this forest, wanting to benefit the forest, wanting happiness, wanting to free the forest from its entanglements.

That person cuts off the crooked, lifeless branches, throws them out of the forest, and cleans the forest thoroughly.

That person carefully tends to the straight, healthy tala branches.

Bhikkhus, after some time, such a forest grows, flourishes, and becomes strong.

Similarly, Bhikkhus, you should abandon unwholesome actions and strive for wholesome actions; in this way, you will achieve growth, flourishing, and strength in this Dharma and Vinaya.

24
Bhikkhus, in ancient times, in this city of Savatthi, there was a female householder named Vedehika.

Bhikkhus, the following good reputation has arisen concerning the householder Vedehika:

"The householder Vedehika is virtuous, the householder Vedehika is gentle;

the householder Vedehika is mild-mannered."

Bhikkhus, the householder Vedehika has a maidservant named Kali, who is skillful, diligent, and meticulous in her work.

Bhikkhus, the maidservant Kali thought:

"My mistress has such a good reputation:

"The householder Vedehika is virtuous;

the householder Vedehika is gentle;

the householder Vedehika is mild-mannered."

I wonder if my mistress has anger that she doesn't show, or if she has no anger at all, or if, because of my meticulous work, she has anger but doesn't show it—or if she doesn't have it at all.

Then let me test my mistress!"

25
Bhikkhus, the maid Kali woke up very late the next morning.

Bhikkhus, the householder Vedehika said to the maid Kali:

26
-- Kali!

27
-- Mistress, what is the matter?

28
-- Why did you wake up so late today?

29
-- Mistress, there is nothing wrong.

30
-- Is there really nothing wrong?

You wicked maid, you woke up late today!

31
And the mistress was angry and displeased, glaring.

32
Bhikkhus, the maid Kali thought:

"My mistress truly has inner anger, but she doesn't show it. It's not that she doesn't have it.

Because of the careful and thorough work I do, my mistress, though she has inner anger, doesn't show it. It's not that she doesn't have it."

"Then let me test my mistress again!"

33
Bhikkhus, the maid Kali woke up even later the next day.

Bhikkhus, the mistress Vedehika said to the maid Kali:

34
-- Kali!

35
-- Mistress, what is it?

36
-- Why did you wake up so late today?

37
-- Mistress, there is nothing wrong.

38
-- Is there really nothing wrong?

You wicked maid, you woke up late today!

39
And the mistress, in her anger and dissatisfaction, uttered words of displeasure.

40
Bhikkhus, the maid Kali thought:

"My mistress truly has inner anger, but she doesn't show it. It's not that she doesn't have it.

Because of the careful and thorough work I do, my mistress, though she has inner anger, doesn't show it. It's not that she doesn't have it."

"Then let us test my mistress again!"

41
Bhikkhus, the maid Kali woke up even later the next morning.

Bhikkhus, the mistress Vedehika said to the maid Kali:

42
-- Kali!

43
-- Mistress, what is the matter?

44
-- Why did you wake up so late today?

45
-- Mistress, there is nothing wrong.

46
-- Is there really nothing wrong?

You wicked maid, you woke up late today!

47
Then, in anger and displeasure, she took the door latch and struck the maid on the head, splitting her skull open.

48
Bhikkhus, the maid Kali, with her head bleeding, went and complained to the neighbors:

49
-- Look at the virtuous deeds of the mistress!

Look at the obedient deeds of the mistress!

Look at the deeds of the maid "My lady, you are so gentle!

But then, in a fit of rage and dissatisfaction, you said to your only maid:

"You woke up late today," and then, in a fit of anger and dissatisfaction, you grabbed the door latch and struck me on the head, splitting my skull open."

50
Bhikkhus, after a time, the following bad rumors arose concerning the mistress Vedehika:

“The mistress Vedehika is wicked!

The mistress Vedehika is not compliant!

The mistress Vedehika is not gentle!”

51
Similarly, bhikkhus, here, a bhikkhu is extremely gentle, extremely compliant, extremely gentle until he is subjected to unpleasant or offensive words.

And bhikkhus, only when a bhikkhu is subjected to unpleasant or offensive words and he remains extremely gentle, extremely compliant, extremely gentle, only then is he considered gentle, extremely compliant, and only then is he considered gentle.

Bhikkhus, I do not call a bhikkhu "easy to talk" when he easily talks about material things like robes, food, bedding, or medicine; when he achieves the quality of easy talking.

Why is that?

Bhikkhus, when he does not have material things like robes, food, bedding, or medicine, he is no longer easy to talk to; he no longer achieves the quality of easy talking.

Bhikkhus, only a bhikkhu who respects the Dharma, reveres the Dharma, and venerates the Dharma becomes easy to talk to, achieves the quality of easy talking—that bhikkhu I call easy to talk.

Therefore, bhikkhus, reflect:

"Only by respecting the Dharma, revering the Dharma, and venerating the Dharma will we become easy to talk to, achieve the quality of easy talking."

Bhikkhus, you must learn in this way.

52
Bhikkhus, there are five kinds of language you can use when speaking to others:

timely or untimely, truthful or untruthful, gentle or harsh, beneficial or unbeneficial, with loving-kindness or with anger.

Bhikkhus, when speaking to others, you can speak at the right time or at the wrong time.

Bhikkhus, when speaking to others, you can speak truthfully or untruthfully.

Bhikkhus, when speaking to others, you can speak gently or harshly.

Bhikkhus, when speaking to others, you can speak beneficially or unbeneficially.

Bhikkhus, when speaking to others, you can speak with loving-kindness or with anger.

Bhikkhus, here you should learn as follows:

"We will keep our minds undefiled, we will not utter evil words, we will live with compassion, with loving-kindness, with no anger in our hearts.

We will live enveloping this person with a mind imbued with loving-kindness.

And with this person as the object, we will live pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, boundless and infinite, without hatred, without anger."

Bhikkhus, thus you should learn.

53
Bhikkhus, it is like a person who comes, holding a shovel and a basket, saying:

"I will make this great land no longer land," and he digs here and there, scatters earth here and there, spits here and there, urinates here and there, thinking:

"You will become not land, you will become not land."

Bhikkhus, what do you think?

Could that person make this great earth become not earth?

54
-- No, Venerable Lord.

Why?

Because this great earth is deep and immeasurable; it is not easy to make this great earth become not earth before that person becomes weary and fails.

55

-- Likewise, Bhikkhus, there are five kinds of language that you can speak to others:

"At the right time or at the wrong time...

or with anger."

Bhikkhus, when speaking to others, you can say:

"At the right time...

or with anger."

Bhikkhus, here you should learn as follows:

"We will keep our minds undefiled;

we will not utter evil words;

we will live with compassion, with loving-kindness, with no anger in our hearts;

we will pervade this person with a mind imbued with loving-kindness.

And with this person as the object, we will pervade the whole world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, vast, boundless, without hatred, without anger."

Bhikkhus, you should learn in this way.

56
Bhikkhus, it is like a person coming, holding paint, yellow, dark blue, or crimson;

he may say:

"I will write colors in this void.

I will make the colors appear."

Bhikkhus, what do you think?

Can that person write forms in the air and make those forms appear?

57
-- Venerable Lord, it is not possible.

Why is that?

Venerable Lord, the air is formless, invisible.

Therefore, it is not easy to write forms and make them appear before one becomes exhausted and fails.

58
-- Likewise, monks, there are five kinds of language that you can speak to others:

"At the right time or at the wrong time...

or with anger...

(as above)...

And with this person as the object, I pervade the entire world with a mind endowed with loving-kindness, vast, boundless, without hatred, without anger."

Monks, you should learn in this way.

59
Bhikkhus, suppose a man comes, holding a burning bundle of dry grass, and says:

"With this burning bundle of dry grass, I will heat and boil the Ganges River."

Bhikkhus, what do you think?

Can that man, with this burning bundle of dry grass, heat and boil the Ganges River?

60
-- No, Venerable Lord.

Why is that?

Venerable Lord, because the Ganges River is deep and immeasurable; it is not easy for a burning bundle of dry grass to heat and boil the Ganges River before that man becomes exhausted and fails.

61
-- Likewise, Bhikkhus, there are five kinds of language that you can use when speaking to others:

"At the right time or at the wrong time...

or with anger."

Bhikkhus, when speaking to others, you can say:

"At the right time...

or with anger." mind...

(as above)...

And with this person as the object, we live pervading the entire world with a mind endowed with loving-kindness, vast, boundless, without hatred, without anger."

Bhikkhus, you should learn in this way.

62
-- Bhikkhus, it is like a cat skin bag, tanned thoroughly, skillfully tanned, soft like cotton, without any hissing or popping sound, and a person comes, holding a stick or a piece of pottery, and says:

"I will take the stick or the piece of pottery and make this cat skin bag, which has been tanned thoroughly, skillfully tanned, soft like cotton, without any hissing or popping sound, make it hiss or pop."

Bhikkhus, what do you think?

That person can, with the stick or the piece of pottery, make this cat skin bag, which has been tanned thoroughly, skillfully tanned, soft like cotton, without any hissing or popping sound, Soft, like cotton, without any hissing or popping sounds, can it make a hissing or popping sound?

63
-- No, Venerable Lord.

Why is that?

Venerable Lord, this catskin bag has been tanned thoroughly, skillfully tanned, and is soft, like cotton, without any hissing or popping sounds. It is not easy to make that bag make a hissing or popping sound before the person becomes exhausted and fails.

64
-- Likewise, monks, there are five kinds of language that you can use when speaking to others:

"Timely or untimely, truthful or untrue, gentle or harsh, beneficial or unbeneficial, with compassion or with anger."

Monks, when speaking to others, you can speak at the right time or at the wrong time.

Monks, when speaking to others, you can speak words Speaking truthfully or speaking untruthfully.

Bhikkhus, when speaking to others, you may speak gently or harshly.

Bhikkhus, when speaking to others, you may speak beneficially or unbeneficially.

Bhikkhus, when speaking to others, you may speak with loving-kindness or with anger.

Bhikkhus, here you should learn as follows:

"We will keep our minds undefiled; we will not utter harsh words;

we will live with compassion, with loving-kindness, with an inner mind free from anger.

We will pervade this person with a mind imbued with loving-kindness."

And with this person as the object, we live pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, vast, boundless, without hatred, without anger. Bhikkhus, you must learn in this way.

65
Bhikkhus, just as vile thieves use a double-edged saw to cut off hands and feet;

yet if anyone here harbors defiled thoughts, that person is therefore not a practitioner of my teachings.

Here, Bhikkhus, you must learn as follows:

"We will keep our minds undefiled;

we will not utter evil words;

we will live with compassion, with loving-kindness, with an inner mind free from anger.

We will live enveloping this person with a mind imbued with loving-kindness.

And with this person as the object, we live pervading the whole world with a mind endowed with loving-kindness, vast, boundless, without hatred, without anger.”

Bhikkhus, you should learn in this way.

66
And, bhikkhus, if you always contemplate this teaching like the saw, then, bhikkhus, will you find any kind of language, whether subtle or harsh, that you cannot endure?

67
-- No, Venerable Lord.

68
-- Bhikkhus, therefore, always contemplate this teaching like the saw, and you will have lasting happiness and peace.

69 
The Blessed One taught thus.

The bhikkhus rejoiced and accepted the Blessed One's teaching with faith.